\364ef\
DUNSANY: 1905
output DUNSANY
\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_in_the_Greco-Roman_world
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sky_deity
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_earth_deities
\
\
The pantheon
Illustration by S. H. Sime from the 1911 Pegana Press edition
Illustration by S. H. Sime from the 1911 Pegana Press edition
MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅
The chief of the gods of Pegāna is MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅, who created the other gods and then fell asleep; when he wakes, he "will make again new gods and other worlds, and will destroy the gods whom he hath made." Men may pray to "all the gods but one"; only the gods themselves may pray to MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅.


Skarl the Drummer
After MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅ "made the gods and Skarl", Skarl made a drum and beat on it in order to lull his creator to sleep; he keeps drumming eternally, for "if he cease for an instant then MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅ will start awake, and there will be worlds nor gods no more". Dunsany writes that:

Some say that the Worlds and the Suns are but the echoes of the drumming of Skarl, and others say that they be dreams that arise in the mind of MANA because of the drumming of Skarl, as one may dream whose rest is troubled by sound of song, but none knoweth, for who hath heard the voice of MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅, or who hath seen his drummer?


The small gods
Besides MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅, there are numerous other gods in Pegāna's pantheon, known as the small gods:

Kib, the Sender of Life in all the Worlds. The god of beasts and men.
Sish, the Destroyer of Hours. The god of time.
Mung, Lord of all Deaths between Pegāna and the Rim. The god of death.
Slid, whose Soul is by the Sea. The god of waters.
Limpang-Tung, the God of Mirth and of Melodious Minstrels.
Yoharneth-Lahai, the God of Little Dreams and Fancies.
Roon, the God of Going and the Thousand Home Gods.
Dorozhand, whose Eyes Regard the End. The god of destiny.
Hoodrazai, the Eye in the Waste. The mirthless god who knows the secret of MĀNA-YOOD-SUSHA̅I̅.
Sirami, the Lord of All Forgetting
Mosahn, the Bird of Doom
Grimbol, Zeebol and Trehagobol, the three goddesses of the tallest mountains, mothers of the three (once) rebellious river gods.

The thousand home gods
According to Roon, the God of Going: "There are a thousand home gods, the little gods that sit before the hearth and mind the fire – there is one Roon". These home gods include:

Pitsu, who strokes the cat
Hobith, who calms the dog
Habaniah, the lord of glowing embers
little Zumbiboo, the lord of dust
old Gribaun, who sits in the heart of the fire to turn the wood to ash
Kilooloogung, the lord of arising smoke
Jabim, the Lord of broken things
Triboogie, the Lord of Dusk
Hish, the Lord of Silence
Wohoon, the Lord of Noises in the Night
Eimēs, Zānēs, and Segástrion, the (once) rebellious lords of the three rivers of the plain
Umbool, the Lord of the Drought
Araxes, Zadres, and Hyraglion, stars in the south
Ingazi, Yo, and Mindo, stars to the north
Trogool, neither god nor beast
Trogool is the mysterious thing set at the very south pole of the cosmos, whose duty is to turn over the pages of a great book, in which history writes itself every day until the end of the world. The fully written pages are "black", meaning the night, and when each one is turned, then the white page symbolizes a new day. Trogool never answers prayer, and the pages that have been turned shall never be turned back, neither by him nor by anyone else.

Its description says: "Trogool is the Thing that men in many countries have called by many names, It is the Thing that sits behind the gods, whose book is the Scheme of Things".
\