   AnyDice
    1. AnyDice
    2. Documentation

                                  Introduction

   AnyDice is an online tool - also called a web application - that you
   can use to calculate dice probabilities. It is like a calculator, but
   for more than just numbers. You feed it a dice mechanic and it will
   tell you the odds for every possible result that you could get.

  Input

   You activate AnyDice by sending it commands. You do so by writing them
   in the input area and pressing the "Calculate" button. You can also
   press Ctrl/Cmd/Meta + Enter in the text area. The most basic command is
   to ask AnyDice to output something, for example output 3d6. This will
   make AnyDice send you the odds for all possible results you could get
   when rolling three traditional six-sided dice and summing their values.

   You can give a name to an output, for example output 3d6 named "three
   dice".

  Output

   The results that AnyDice calculates can be presented to you in multiple
   ways - or views - each suited for different purposes.

   Table
          By default the results are presented in a table. All possible
          results are enumerated, from smallest to largest, along with
          their odds. Also shows is a bar graph that gives a visual
          representation of the odds. The output of multiple mechanics are
          shown underneath each other.

   Graph
          An alternative presentation shows the odds using connected dots
          on a grid. The dots show the same pattern that the bar graph
          does, but zoomed in. The lines between the dots are a visual aid
          and have no special meaning. This presentation is most useful to
          compare multiple mechanics. Note that the grid often overshoots
          the maximum possible values as it tries to display nice
          numerical increments. However, the dots displayed are correct.

   Export
          The export presentation uses the same structure as the tables
          do, except that only plain text is used and that the odds are
          displayed with more significant digits. The text can be imported
          into applications that understand the comma-separated values
          (CSV) file format.

   The data of the results can be modified for display in four different
   ways.

   Normal
          The normal way to display results is to show the exact odds of
          each individual value, independent of the other values.

   At least
          It is also possible to show the odds of getting at least the
          resulting values shown. This means that the lowest possible
          result will always have its odds listed as 100%, while the
          highest possible result will have its normal odds listed.

   At most
          This is the opposite of the previous option, listing the normal
          odds for the lowest possible result, while listing 100% for the
          highest possible result.

   Transposed
          This groups the results by value, instead of by mechanic. It
          allows you to more easily track a value's odds across multiple
          mechanics. This is only really useful in combination with the
          graph display.

   The average of all possible results is shown after the name of each
   output. Note that this value need not be a possible result itself. The
   (population) standard deviation is shown here as well.

  Links

   You can create a link to your program by clicking on the "click to
   create link" text above the input area. It will be replaced by a URL
   that will instruct AnyDice to load the current program. Whenever you
   click the Calculate button, the link text will be reset.

   You can dictate which view AnyDice will use with a link by appending
   modifiers to it. For example, appending /at_least/graph will instruct
   AnyDice to show the at-least odds using the graph view.

   made by Jasper Flick
