   AnyDice
    1. AnyDice
    2. Articles

                           Three Basic Distributions

   One, Two, Three

   When looking at the probability distributions of dice mechanics, you'll
   find that they fall into one of three generic categories. They're
   commonly called flat, pyramid, and bell, which corresponds to the
   shapes of their graphs. Let's take a look at each of them.
   [basic-distributions.png] Three distributions types.

Zero

   Ok, there are actually four types. When you roll zero dice, the result
   is always the same. The graph is a single point. It is useful to be
   aware of this option, because a randomizer is not always needed. If you
   don't use dice, cards, or any other randomizer, it means your
   resolution mechanic isn't based on Fortune. This is not as strange as
   it may sound. The alternatives are Drama and Karma. It is worthwhile to
   research them, but I won't discuss them any further.

One

   The simplest die mechanic consists of rolling one die. All numbers are
   equally likely to be rolled, whether it's a d6, a d10, or a d20. The
   probability distribution is a flat line. The at-least distribution is a
   slanted line.
   1d 1d at-least A single d6, d10, and d20, normal vs. at-least.

   Single die rolls are compared to one or more thresholds to determine
   the level of success. The simplest case is a single target number that
   sets a success-failure boundary, the most complex case has a specific
   result for each possible outcome.

   Increasing the die size does three notable things. First, it allows
   more possible outcomes, so you can have more variety or more detail.
   Second, the likelihood of getting a specific value drops, making it
   feel more random. Third, adding a flat modifier on top of a die becomes
   less significant. For example, a d10 has ten distinct outcomes, leading
   to at most ten different results. The likelihood of getting a specific
   value is 10%. If you add +1 to a roll, you shift the result upwards by
   10%. In contrast, a d20 has twenty possible outcomes, each having a
   chance of 5% to occur. Adding +1 to a roll shifts the result upwards by
   5%.

Two

   If you add a second die, the probability distribution will be pushed
   upwards in the middle, resulting in what is commonly called a pyramid
   shape. This is because the average value can be rolled in more ways
   than the extreme values. This progression is linear because the
   probability difference between adjancent numbers is always the same,
   except where it flips in the middle. As as result, the at-least view
   produces a curved slope. 2d10 is a nice example.
   2d 2d at-least 2d10, normal vs. at-least.

   You use two dice if you want a bias towards an average result, but
   still want extreme values to occur regularly. Basically, it makes the
   system feel less random than a one-die system. As with a single die,
   increasing the die size makes each specific value less likely to occur.
   Note that two opposed-sign die rolls function as one double-dice roll.
   1d10-1d10 has the same graph shape as 2d10 and -2d10, the only
   difference is the range of the rolled values.
   [pyramids.png] Three variants of 2d10.

   You can also combine two different dice. In that case the larger die
   dominates, flattening the middle of the graph. If the size difference
   is large, it practially functions like a one-die system. This sequence
   illustrates it well: 1d10 - 1d10+1d2 - 1d10+1d4 - 1d10+1d6 - 1d10+1d8 -
   2d10.
   1d to 2d 1d to 2d at-least Going from 1d to 2d, normal vs. at-least.

Three

   The difference between two and three dice is similar to the difference
   between one and two dice. Because we're adding a new linear progression
   on top of an already existing linear progression, the result is a
   gradual curve. Because the curve is symmetrical, it has the shape of a
   bell. The at-least view remains a curve, which is rounder than the one
   for two dice.
   3d 3d at-least 3d10, normal vs. at-least.

   Compare 2d10 with 3d10. In the case of 2d10, the chance difference
   between adjacent numbers is always 1.00%, first increasing and then
   decreasing. In the case of 3d10, the difference between the chance
   differences first increases with 0.10%, then decreases with 0.20%, and
   then reverses. The differences are 0.20%, 0.30%, 0.40%, ..., 1.00%,
   0.80%, 0.60%, ..., 0.00%, then reversed.

   Using three dice means that extreme values will show up rarely, while
   values near the average will show up often. Moreover, numbers near the
   edges and center of the graph have about the same chance to show up as
   their neighbor. Everything else I've said about two dice applies to
   three dice as well. Whether you add or subtract dice doesn't matter for
   the shape of the graph. Also check out the progression 2d10 - 2d10+1d2
   - 2d10+1d4 - 2d10+1d6 - 2d10+1d8 - 3d10.
   2d to 3d 2d to 3d at-least Going from 2d to 3d, normal vs. at-least.

More

   Adding more than three dice doesn't result in a new graph shape, you're
   stuck with the bell. What does change is the exact slope of the curve,
   as the difference between the extreme and the average values becomes
   greater.

   made by Jasper Flick
